From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bavaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
today. The story of how the conspiracy
theories surrounding Jeffrey Epstein
made their way to the highest levels of
the Trump administration and why over
the past few days, the White House
finally decided it was time to shut them
down.
My colleague Glenn Thrush takes us
inside the saga.
[Music]
It's Wednesday, July 9th.
Hey there, Glenn.
Hello.
Thank you for joining us. 17 minutes
late.
Uh, well, you know, you're lucky it
wasn't 20.
I know you're on deadline, so thank you
for making time for us. You're welcome,
Glenn. We don't think of President Trump
and those around him as people who
declaratively and definitively kill off
conspiracy theories, especially when
those conspiracy theories are popular
with their supporters. Quite the
contrary. And yet, that's what has just
happened. So, tell us that story. Well,
look, on Monday, they tried to slam the
door on an investigation they themselves
had opened. The Justice Department in a
pretty detailed memo confirmed what a
bunch of other investigations had
already shown. There was no client list
of shadowy Jeffrey Epstein clients that
conspired to murder him. And they
released a bunch of videotapes that
showed what had already been revealed in
other investigations that he died by
suicide.
The problem with all this is that most
of the people involved in running these
investigations, the attorney general,
Pam Bondi, Cash Patel at the FBI, Dan
Bonino, his deputy, had over the years
suggested that there was something
nefarious that was being covered up by
the Biden administration, and that they
were the ones who were going to get to
the bottom of this.
Right. Thus, that phrase you just
invoked that this was the White House
trying to slam a door that they
themselves had kicked open, which is a
very tricky piece of business. So tell
us that in fuller detail really the
birth, the life and what is now the
attempted death of this uniquely
Trumpian conspiracy theory surrounding
Jeffrey Epstein and how it ultimately
enshes so many senior members of the
Trump administration. I mean, it it's a
really unlikely
cause celeb for Donald Trump, who
himself spent a fair amount of time
hanging out with Jeffrey Epstein,
right?
So, this is all born out of a death.
Jeffrey Epstein is found in his cell
hanging, right?
In July 2019, the medical examiner
determines that it was a suicide. The
Bureau of Prison determines the same.
The Department of Justice concurs. The
investigations which took place under
the Biden administration found no
evidence of anything nefarious in his
death. But really almost from the start
it snowballs into something much bigger.
Jeffrey Epstein is one of the most
connected guys in the world. His death
occurs under really weird circumstances
in a totally dysfunctional prison. There
are gaps in the narrative. It is very
hard for people to accept that it was
what it appeared to be, which is a
distraught man who had been convicted
and accused of monstrous crimes had just
taken his life,
right? Sex trafficking,
sex trafficking with minors, possession
of pornography, just the worst possible
crimes in our society.
What happens then over the next few
years is these doubts begin to grow and
grow and grow alongside the right-wing
populist movement.
I look at it as sort of the Swiss Army
knife of conspiracies.
On one hand, it shows this cabal of
incredibly powerful men who are hanging
around a guy who was sex trafficking
minors. Bill Clinton was on his plane.
Members of the British royal family were
on his plane. Bill Gates hung out with
Epstein.
That really feeds the fever swamps of
conspiracy theorists who form the a good
part of Trump's far-right coalition that
there is this international cabal of
people who are making decisions and
covering up monstrous crimes.
I want to see Epstein's list. I want to
see the list of uh the sexual misconduct
slush fund.
Release the files. Release the files.
For once, it would be nice to see the
federal government forced to tell the
truth about something.
And this became a central core of the
argument made by many Trump supporters
that the Justice Department and FBI were
corrupt, engaged in covering up
information to protect their allies and
needed to be overhauled. So on one hand,
it fed into sort of the emotional force
of the Trump coalition that they were
overturning a corrupt establishment. On
the flip side, it enabled people who
have claimed that they needed to take
radical steps to overhaul and root out
deep state influences in federal law
enforcement, gave them a justification
for doing so. So, it has been an
extraordinarily central element of the
Trump coalition.
H So, this becomes a totem of you cannot
trust your justice system. people inside
that system, presumably Democrats,
liberalleaning people, they are using
the justice system to protect their own.
That's the distilled version of this
theory. Remember, this is coming at
roughly the same time he's being
targeted by the Justice Department. And
so this dovetales with this larger sense
that Trump and his supporters have that
the government, which is being
controlled by Democrats, is coming after
them. So by the time the 2024 campaign
rolls around, the Epstein case is baked
into the Trump base. Everybody
associated with Trump, working around
him, who wants to come back to power
with him really needs to embrace this
cause and the focal point becomes this
mythical client list, this roster of the
rich and powerful who were somehow in on
the Epstein conspiracy. Just to say by
client list, clients of of what exactly?
In general, it's the group of rich and
powerful older men who are on the sex
trafficking list. But it's also been
expressed as people who've flown on the
plane with Epstein. really the belief
that there is a spreadsheet or a list in
a book that enumerates this club of
people who are both morally bankrupt and
enormously powerful and are overseeing a
cover up.
That's the claim.
The theory is that such a list exists
and it's really the holy grail of the
Epstein conspiracy. So, two people who
become really vocal about that theory
are Cash Patel, a first term Trump
official who goes on to become one of
his loudest campaign surrogates, and Dan
Bonino, a former Secret Service agent
from Long Island who hosts a popular
podcast.
Dan Bonino.
Welcome to the Bonino Brief. I'm Dan
Bonino. What the hell are they hiding
with Jeffrey Epstein?
What do Clinton, Obama officials, big
money leftists, a former prime minister
of Israel, why do they want to make this
Jeffrey Epstein story go away so bad?
So, Banino speaking on his own podcast
suggested that there were a lot of these
people on the list who had stories to
tell about how this conspiracy was
formed. Mhm.
And there may be some stories to tell
about the activities of those rich,
famous, and powerful people and some
underageed women that they should not
have been around at all and definitely
not around in the manner that some of my
sources tell me. You getting what I'm
saying? And Cash Patel pushes it even
further by singling out Bill Gates.
You don't think that Bill Gates is
lobbying Congress night and day to
prevent the disclosure of that list?
What the hell are the House Republicans
doing? They have the majority. You can't
get the list. Put on your big boy pants
and let us know who the pedophiles are.
We have
And of course, when Donald Trump becomes
President Trump once again, wins the
2024 election, he puts both Bongino and
Patel in positions of pretty
extraordinary authority
inside the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
Exactly, Michael. And he makes Patel
director and he inserts Bongino as
Patel's number two. And what's
extraordinary about this is they have
less experience in those jobs than
anyone else who has ever occupied them.
And the justification for putting them
in despite their lack of experience is
that there are all these conspiracies
and coverups going on. And only an
outsider untainted by the bureaucracy
has the guts and power to rip everything
apart.
That's kind of fascinating. In other
words, only the kind of people who would
embrace and promulgate conspiracy
theories are qualified to get inside the
government and get to the bottom of
them.
Bingo. Well, so what happens once these
people, the Binos, the Patels, having
embraced this conspiracy theory, end up
in these positions of power in which
they can actually investigate them. What
do they do?
Patel and Banino jumped into the FBI at
a time of crisis when there were mass
firings and huge instability. So, they
really had to focus on stabilizing,
right? Trump was busy firing all his
perceived enemies inside that bureau.
Yeah. So Pam Bondi, the attorney
general, who remember was an emergency
second pick when Matt Gates went down in
flames,
right?
Eager to please President Trump, raises
her hand and says, "I'm going to take
care of this." So she goes on Fox.
The DOJ may be releasing the list of
Jeffrey Epstein's clients. Will that
really happen? And when she's asked
about the Epstein client list, she says
it's sitting on my desk right now to
review. Um that's been a directive um by
President Trump. I'm reviewing.
She says, "I have all these files on my
desk.
A lot of flight logs, a lot of names, a
lot a lot of information." And the very
next day,
I'm here at the White House. I just met
with Attorney General Pam Bondi.
Bondi shows up at this meeting of MAGA
influencers. a lot of them were Epstein
conspiracy theorists and hands out these
big thick white binders.
It says on the front, "The Epstein files
phase one by order of Attorney General
Pamela Bondi and FBI Director Cash
Patel."
See that right there? That's the Epstein
files.
And for a moment, all these people
sitting around this room think we
finally got it.
There's so much to tell you. All I can
say is promises made, promises kept.
we're finally going to get the truth
about Jeffrey Epstein.
So then they flipped open the binders
and man were they disappointed.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So Glenn, what ends up being inside of
those thick white binders that Attorney
General Bondi has handed out to these
MAGA influencers?
Not much.
It's mostly procedural jargon. Um,
heavily heavily redacted.
It was a big dud. No client list, not
even uh manifests necessarily from the
planes. It was a lot of stuff that had
already been in the public domain. So,
there was this huge backlash against
Bondi in particular for having
overpromised
because we're all waiting for
bombshells. We're all waiting for juicy
stuff. And that's not what's in this
binder. That's not what's in this binder
at all.
It is the biggest disappointment I think
that you'll find.
So, she first responds by blaming the
FBI.
Director Patel is going to get us a
detailed report as to why the FBI
withheld all of those documents.
Okay. and blaming prosecutors in other
offices for sloww walking this which
turned out not necessarily to be true
and a source had told me where the
documents were being kept southern
district of New York shop. Then what
happens is Bondi dispatches a bunch of
prosecutors from the National Security
Division of the Justice Department who
are otherwise involved in highlevel
international investigations out to this
facility in Virginia to go through
videotape and files to see if there's
anything in them.
The FBI they're reviewing there are tens
of thousands of videos of Epstein with
children or child porn. People who are
supposed to be looking at terrorism
investigations, foreign influence, are
looking into a case of a guy who had
died more than half a decade prior.
And do you suspect, Glenn, that she's
doing this because she actually thinks
they're going to find something or
because she thinks I need to say that I
did this?
In baseball, it's called running out the
ground ball. She needs to show that
she's making a maximum effort and so
does Patel who's also dispatching dozens
and dozens of FBI agents, some of them
pulled off of other cases to do the same
thing. So a sizable portion of the
United States federal law enforcement
apparatus is devoting itself to what the
federal government itself has already
said is a nothing burger.
Absolutely. Meanwhile, on the outside,
the pressure just keeps building and
building and building. And because folks
in Trump's MAGA base can't blame him for
doing a bait and switch, they focus on
federal law enforcement, particularly
Pam Bondi, Laura Loomer, who's never
liked Bondi, thought that she was too
liberal to be in her job, starts calling
for her resignation.
So Patel and Bino, who are both wise in
the ways of Trump politics, are seeing
this happening in real time and they
want to minimize the damage. So they go
on Fox.
You said Jeffrey Epstein committed
suicide.
People don't believe it.
And they give a very uncomfortable
interview. Well, I mean, listen, they
have a right to their opinion, but as
someone who has worked as a public
defender, as a prosecutor, who's been in
that prison system, who's been in the
Metropolitan Detention Center, who's
been in segregated housing, um, you
know, a suicide when you see one. And
that's what that was. Bonino says with a
very stern countenance,
he killed himself. You again, you want
me to I've I've seen the whole file. He
killed himself.
Jeffrey Epstein killed himself. Nothing
to see here. Hm. And they're now doing a
180 from where they were before. Because
there was once a moment where fanning
this conspiracy theory was to their
benefit, to Trump's benefit. Suddenly
now it's not.
It had become a liability because they
couldn't meet the expectations they
themselves had stooped.
[Music]
And so, Glenn, I think that brings us to
this week when the administration sends
out this memo where we started our
conversation saying officially there's
nothing to see here. There is no
conspiracy. There's no evidence of a
conspiracy. Move on. From everything
you're saying, the White House does this
because this conspiracy theory is
starting to threaten to eat its own
leaders, Bondi, Bonino Patel. And so the
answer to a question that has in many
ways loomed over the Trump world for a
really long time, which is when will the
president and those around him kill off
a conspiracy? The answer to that is when
it undermines their own authority and
their ability to do their jobs. Donald
Trump views his political positions as
changeable and he uses this kind of
conspiracy theory to provide energy
almost rocket fuel for his own movement
and when it no longer suits his purposes
he's willing to move on. There was a
cabinet meeting on Tuesday and he was
asked about the closing of the Epstein
investigation.
Are you still talking about Jeffrey
Epstein? This guy's been talked about
for years. You're asking we have Texas,
we have this, we have all of the things
and are people still talking about this
guy, this creep?
That is unbelievable.
And he basically said, "Why is anyone
still talking about Jeffrey Epstein?"
Mhm.
And Bondi essentially said the same
thing. So the word from the top now is
that the Epstein case is closed and
people need to move on. I'm curious what
you think the lesson here will be for
these three top Trump officials who
really did get earned by this
experience. Bondi, Bunchino, Patel.
It's one thing to be on the outside when
you can say whatever you want and
there's no responsibility for proving
anything.
It's another when you have to actually
run the organizations you've spent years
and years beating up and accusing of
coverups.
It only takes an instant for the
outsiders to then turn on you. And I
think that's what Pam Bondi is learning,
that's what Cash Patel is learning, and
that's what Dan Bonino is learning.
Right? When you write a conspiracy
theory about basically the deep state to
power, you very much run the risk, and
this seems to be what happened here, of
becoming, in the eyes of those who
believe in the conspiracy theory, the
deep state itself.
That's right. In a sense, this is what
happens when outsiders become insiders.
They have the responsibility for running
the institution. Even an institution
that they've attacked and have claimed
as corrupt. The dayto-day
responsibilities that these people are
bearing forces them to accept realities
that folks outside the wall don't have
to.
Mhm.
So the whole thing is kind of an
interesting paradox. On one hand, they
may have done the right thing
institutionally. They may have
ultimately stood on the path of truth
here, but they've weakened their own
position in the movement that elevated
them. By contradicting these conspiracy
theories, they've incurred the wrath of
the people who put them in power,
Trump's base.
Well, Glenn, thank you very much. We
appreciate it. Thank you.
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today. The
Supreme Court said that President Trump
can move ahead with plans to slash the
federal workforce and dismantle federal
agencies without input from Congress.
The ruling could result in job losses
for tens of thousands of workers. The
ruling is Trump's latest victory before
the Supreme Court as he tries to expand
his power and reshape the federal
government.
And on Tuesday, President Trump issued
some of his harshest criticism to date
of Russian leader Vladimir Putin,
implying that Putin could not be trusted
in negotiations to end the war in
Ukraine.
We get a lot of thrown at us by
Putin for you want to know the truth.
He's very nice all the time, but it
turns out to be meaningless.
The remarks came a day after Trump
reversed course and said that he would
supply Ukraine with more US weapons to
fend off Russia, something that Putin
has sought to prevent.
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Netski, Relle Bonja, and Carlos Prito.
It was edited by Rachel Quester and
Patricia Willins. contains original
music by Alicia Etup and Rowan Nisto and
was engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our
theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Makabaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]